HOW TO OPEN


Though he was first remembered by history for his success in the war, he has also been celebrated for his Irish heritage, innovative business ventures, and charitable works.


Richard “Dick” W. Dowling was born in Tuam, Ireland in 1837. He immigrated to the US in 1846 and moved to Houston in 1857. 


The American Civil War erupted in 1861, but the tensions that fueled the conflict had been building for a long time before the election of Abraham Lincoln. Economic, political, and cultural differences between the North and South, especially on the issue of slavery, grew more and more drastic as the United States aged, until the differences had grown so great that Southern states felt compelled to secede.
        
On September 8, 1863, Dowling won a remarkable victory for the Confederacy in the Battle of Sabine Pass against superior Union numbers. The victory at the border of Texas and Louisiana prevented the Union army from entering Texas until much later in the war. Following the battle, Dowling and his troops were acclaimed throughout the Confederacy, receiving Confederate medals of valor as well as high praise from Jefferson Davis.  


1865 - end of Civil War


Dowling died in 1867 from yellow fever after helping tend victims of the disease.


In the years following emancipation, Houston chose to name several institutions and objects in Dick Dowling’s honor. The streets surrounding Emancipation Park, a central location for Houston’s African American community, were renamed to Dowling and Tuam (after Tuam, Ireland, where Dowling was born) in 1892.


The statue made in Dowling’s honor, unveiled in 1905, is Houston’s oldest piece of public art. The statue was at first located in a prominent position in front of City Hall. However, in 1939 the statue was moved to Sam Houston Park because City Hall was moved. In 1957, it was placed in storage before being tucked away in a somewhat obscure corner of Hermann Park the next year, where it still stands today.


civil rights 
In the middle of the civil rights movements and the fight to desegregate Houston schools, Dick Dowling Middle School received its name in 1968. Many have perceived these efforts to celebrate Dowling as sleights against African American Houstonians.




In March 1997, the statue was rededicated, but the focus of the ceremony was placed on Dowling’s Irish heritage. The key speaker, from Dowling’s birthplace in Ireland, barely mentioned the Confederacy as he praised Dowling as an Irish immigrant to the United States.


CLOSING